Domain 1:
Threats,Attacks and Vulnerabilities: 21% of Exam

1.1
IoC: Indicators of Compromise
Types of Malwares:
Virus: Types- 1.Armored Virus:- Makes its disassembling difficult.
			  2.Phage virus:- Modifies other programs and databases.
			  3.Multipartite virus:- It changes its form or mutates to avoid detection.
			  4.Retro Virus:- it attacks or bypasses the antivirus.
			  5.Stealth Virus:-avoids its detection by remaining in memory.

Rootkit:- A clandestine computer program designed to provide continued privileged access to computer while hiding its prescence.
Trojan Horse:- Difference bw trojan horse and virus is that unlike viruses trojan horses do not replicate itself like virus.
Logic or Time bomb:-Do something malacious when a certain event is triggered.		  
Keylogger:-
Bot/Botnets:-
Bckdoors:-
RATs(Remote Aceess Trojans):-Gives full control of a device remotely.
APT(Advanced Persistent Threat):-

1.2 Attack Types
1.2.1
Social Engineering: 
1.Online :- a) phishing(emails asking for revealing info), vishing(making calls or leaving voice messages purporting to be from reputable companies.), whaling(a phishing attack aimed at wealthy, powerful, or prominent individuals), spear phishing(it is a variant of phishing, it is against one specific person,much more personalized), pharming (traffic redirect to a spoofed website)
		    b) Spoofing:-Hoax(false warning alerts), Swatting(fraudlent calls to police), Watering Hole Attack(attacking specific users by infecting websites they frequently visit)

2. Offline/Physical:
a)tailgating(gaining entry to electronically locked systems is to follow someone through the door they just unlocked.)
b)impersonation
c)Dumpster diving(searching into trash for critical information)
d)Shoulder Surfing

1.2.2
Application Attacks:-
OWASP Top 10.
a)Buffer overflow
b)Injection:SQL,XML etc
c)XSS
d)CSRF/XSRF
e)Privilege Escalation
f)Driver manipulation attacks: Shimming-creating a library or modifying existing one to bypass a drive and perform a function other than the one for which API was created.
							   Refactoring- set of techniques used to identify the flow and then modify the internal structure of code without changing the code's behaviour.
Cryptographic Attacks:
a)Birthday: 
b)known plain text/cipher text:							   
c)Frequency Analysis:

1.2.3
Network and Wireless Attacks
A)Highjacking
a)clickjacking:tricking a web user into clicking a spoofed button or graphic
b)Session Highjacking:exploiting a valid computer session, or session key, to gain unauthorized access to information or services.
c)URL Highjacking/Typo squatting: the act of registering domains similar to those of known entity(gooogle.com)

B)Network hijacking Attacks
a)MAC Spoofing
b)IP Spoofing:modifying IP packets.
c)ARP Spoofing:
d)Man-in-the-Middle

C)Wireless Attacks
a)Evil Twin
b)Rogue AP
c)Initialization Vector(IV)
d)Jamming: Causing interference with wireless signal

D)PAN(Personal Area Attacks):
a)Bluejacking: the sending of unsolicited messages(spam) over Blutooth.
b)Bluesnarfing: Intercepting blutooth traffic

1.3
Threat Actors: A person or entity that is responsible for an event or incident that impacts or has potential to imact security of another entity. 
Types:
a)Script kiddies 
b)Hacktivist-use hacking to accomplish some activist or political goal, usually defCES Websites.
c)Insiders: Internal Employees seeking to cause damage to their organization.
d)Organized Crime:
e)Compettitors
f)Nation States: Countries sponsoring illegal or fraudlent actions
g)APT-Advanced Persistent Threat:Ataccker stays undetected for a long period of time. The intention is to steal data rather than to cause harm.  
h)Deep Web: Anything that that search engine can't find.
i)Dark Web: It is apart of deep Web that is only accessible by special software ike tor.
j)OSIINT(Open-Source Intelligence)

1.4
Threats ,Attacks and Vulnerability
a)Penetration testing
b)Info Gathering/Discovery/Reconnaissance: Active vs Passive
c)Types of testing: Non Intrusive(vulnerability scans) vs Intrusive(exploiting vulnerabilities) 
d)Penetration testing vs Vulnerability Scanning vs Risk Assessment

1.5
Explaining Vulnerability scanning concepts
a)Vulnerability Scanning Process: Passively test controls
								  Identify vulnerability/system flaw/unpatched code
								  identity lack of security controls
								  identity common misconfigurations by reviewing system settings, policies, or rule sets.

Types of Vulnerability scanning:
1) Intrusive vs non intrusive
2)credentialed vs non crdentialed
3)false positive

Note. There is no exploitation in vulnerability assessment.

1.6
Threats, Attacks and Vulnerabilities
a)Vulnerbility Types: Race Condition
					  Improper input handling
					  Improper error handling
					  