Identity and Access Management
4.1 
Identity and access management concepts:
4.1.1 Identification and authentication
	a)Identification
		1)First Step
		2)Subject provides identification information-unique to subject
		3)Username, User ID, Account Number
	
	b)Authentication
		1)Verifying the identification information
		2)Proving identity
		3)Password/phrase, PIN,fingerpprint, Smart card
4.1.2 Authorization and Auditing
	a)Authorization
		1)What you allowed to see or do
		2)Determining the operations a subject may perform on an object
		3)Permissions
	b)Auditing/Accounting:
		1)Record of events
		2)logs
	
4.1.3 Authentication Factors:
	a)Something you know like PIN,password
	b)Somethin you hve, such as smartcard, token, or identificaion device.
	c)Something you are, like fingerprints or retinal patterns.
	d)Somthing you do, such as an actionyou must take to complete authentication.
	e)Where you are(geolocation)
	
4.1.4 Authentication
	a)Single Factor(SFA)
	b)Multi-Factor Authentication(MFA)
	c)Mutual Authentication:
		each party validates the other's identity.

4.1.5 Biometrics
	a)Type III Something you are.
	b)Challenges:
		1)False Acceptance Rate(FAR):when system accepts someone(intruder) who should be r		  ejeted.
		2)False Rejection Rate(FRR): When the system reject an suhtorized user.
		3)Cross-Over Error Rate(CER):
			Metric for complaining biometric systems.
			The point where FAR and FRR are equal.

4.1.6 Federation/Federtion Identity:
	a)The means of linking aperson's electronic idemtity and attributes 	    stored across multiple distinct identity management systems.
	b)Means linking a user's identity with their privileges in manner that can be used across business boundaries.
	c)Allows a user to have single identity that they can use across different businesses.
	d)Like Facebook,Google,Microsoft
	
4.1.7 Single Sign-On

4.2 Given a scenerio, install and configure identity and access services.

4.2.1 Directories/Directory Service Protocols:
	a)Repositories of an organisation's network resources and users.
	b)Most follow a hirarchial database format, based on X.500 standard. 	    c)A directory service manages the entries and data in the directory and enables access control and identity management.
	d)Types: Microsoft Active Directory(AD), and LDAP
	
4.2.1.1 LDAP (Lightweight Direcory Access Protocol)
	a)A standardized directory access protocol.
	b)Main purpose is to query the LDAP user database- pared-down X.500-based directories.
	c)Supported by most major vendors including Microsoft AD and OpenLDAP.
	d)Hierarchical structure

4.2.1.2 LDAP Security
	a)LDAP is vulnerable to snooping.
	b)Encrypt communications using SSL/TLS to secure LDAP transmissions.	    c)Certificates can validate authentication requests.
	d)LDAPv3 bind requests should use Simple Authentication and Security Layer(SASL)
	   
4.2.2 Kerberos
	a)A symmetric key authentication protocol
	b)Kerberos v5 uses mutual authentication between the requesting client and the supporting server through a Key Distribution Center(KDC)
		1)Tickets lists user's privileges.
	c)Each time user wishes to access some resource on the network, the user's computr presents the KDC with the TGT; the TGT then sends that user's computer a service ticket, granting user access to that service.
	
	d)Kerberos Authentication Process:
		1)Each time user wishes to access some resource on the network, the user's computer presents the KDC with the TGT.
		2)The TGT then sends that user's computer a service ticket, granting the user access to that service.
		3)User's computer then sends the service ticket to the server the user is trying to access.
		4)As a final authentication check, that server then communicates with TGT to confirm and valdate the session.

4.2.2.3 RADIUS(Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service):
	a)An IETF standard 
	b)Implemented by most of the major os manufacturers.
	c)Uses UDP transport to a centralized server providing authentication and access control for networks.

4.2.2.4 Terminal Access Controller Access Control System Plus(TACACS+):
	a)Handles authntication, authorization, and accounting(AAA) servics
	b)Similar to RADIUS
	c)TCP rather UDP as it's tranport method.
	d)Client/Server model
   	e)TACACS+ advantages over RADIUS:
		1)TCP rather than UDP as it's transport method- more reliable.
		2)Encrypts the entire packet, not just authentication.
		3)Controls the authorization of router commands.

4.2.2.5 Password Authentication Protocol(PAP)
4.2.2.6 Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol(CHAP)
	1)It provides on-demand authentication over encrypted channels
	2)Server first authenticates client.
	3)Client generates a one-way hashing function(MD5 algorithm) and sends to the service.
	4)Client hash is compared against service's hash by the authenticator service.
	5)Process is repeated at random intervals to prevent replay attacks.

4.2.2.7 MSCHAP and PEAP
	a)MSCHAPv2-Microsoft proprietary version.
	b)Uses a new string each time for authentication.
	c)the client and server mutually authenticate and use two encryption keys.
	d)It should not be used alone but with PEAP(Protected Extensible Authentication Protocol) ot L2TP/IPSec
        e)PEAP
		1)PEAP provides a TLs/SSL tunnel
		2)Protects authentication trafic.
		3)Uses a certificate on the authentication server.
	
4.2.3 Federated Services
	1)Security Assertion Markup Language(SAML)
		a)An Extensible Markup Language framework for creating and exchanging security information between online systems.
		b)Main purpose is SSO for enterprise users over the web.
		c)Three main functions:
			1)The user seeking to verify its identity is the principal.
			2)The entity that can verify the identity of the end user is the Identity Provider.
			3)The identity that uses the Identity Provider to verify the identity of the end user is the Service Provider.

	2)Open Authorization(OAuth):
		a)Protocol used for Internet token based authorization.
		b)Purpose is API authorization between applications.
		c)Current version is 2.0.
		d)Allows access tokens to be issued to third-party clients(resource consumers) with approval of the resource owner, such s social media site.	
		e)OAth 2.0 uses the JSON and HTTP protocols.
		Use SSL/TLS to prevent eavesdropping.

	3)OpenID and OpenID Connect:
		a)An idenetiy based on OAuth 2.0 specifictions
		b)Used for consumer single sign-on
		c)OpeID Connect implements authentication as an exension to the OAuth 2.0 authorization process. Provides additional security- staging, encryption of identity data, and session management.
		d)Uses an ID token structure including the authentication of an end user via a JSON web token(JWT). AJWT is used to prove that an authentic source created the originating data.

4.3 Access Control Models:
	a)Terms:
		1)A subject is an active entity(generally an individual, process, or device).
		2)An object is some resource that the subject is attempting to access.
	b)MAC- Mandatory Access Control:
		1)Assigning labels to resources and accounts(objects).
		2)Users and system accounts(subjects) are assigned a classification level. 
		3)Examples: SECRET, CONFIDENTIAL, PROPRIETARY and PUBLIC
		4)Subjects access rights must be above the objects classification.
		5)Access is nondiscretionary.
		6)Used in government/military.
		7)Rigid and most secure.

	c)DAC- Discretionary Access Control:
		1)Access rights at the discretion of the system or information owner/ Security principal.
		2)Owner assigns security accesshas flexibility in accessing information or systems.
		3)Allows dynamic sharing.
		4)Increased risk of unauthorized disclosure or access.




	d)ABAC- Attribute-based access control:
		1)Defined in NIST 800-162, Attribute Based Control Definitions and Considerations.
		2)Attributes are characteristics that define specific aspect of the subject, object, enviroment conditions, and/or requested actions that are predefined and preassigned by an authority.
		3)Considers all of the various attributes associated with the subject and object in making the acccess control decision.
		4)A dynamic access control method.			
		5)Based on the Extensible Access Control Markup Language(XACML)

	e)Role-based access control(RBAC):
		
	f)Rule-based access control(RBAC)
	
	g)Tokens:
		1)Physical device used for access.
		2)Software or hardware based.
		3)One-Time passwords(OTP):
			a)HTOP-HMAC OTP-uses a hash
			b)TOPT-Time-based-limited time availability
		4)Examples:wireless keycard, key fob, or any physical device
		5)Contains a digital certificate and/or static password:s token.
	
	h)Physical Access Controls:
		a)Both use embedded microchips.
		b)Also see PIV and CAC- using certificates.
	
	i)Proximity cards
		1)Hold little information
		2)Determines access by matching the card identification number to access database information.

	j)Smart Cards
		1)Provides n authenticating cryptographic key reader.
		2)May include other informationon a progrmmble chip(biometrics, certificates)
	
	k)Certificate-based authentication:
		1)PIV/CAC smart card
			a)Personal Identity Verification(PIV) cards- Contactless smart card used by US Federl Workers.
			b)Common Access Card(CAC)-A credit card seized smart card used by US DoD workers. Inserted into  small card reader authenticated with a PIN.
		2)IEEE 802.1x
			a)Certificate based network authentication.
			Allows only authorized devices to connect to the network.

4.3.2 File System Security
	a)File System Security(aka "flat files"):
		1)Leverage access controls, encryption and RAID 
		2)Microsoft NTFS allows file-level access control where FAT allows only share-level access.
		3)Consider using encryption for sensitive directories/media.

4.3.3 Database Security:
	1)Store organizations most sensitive/critical data.
	2)Leverage network security and access, controlswithin the Database Management Systems(DBMS).
	3)Trnsparent Data Encryption(TDE) for data
	4)Crypto Key management.	


