6. Cryptography & PKI 

6.1
Crypto Concepts-Part 1
	a)Encoding vs Encryption

	b)Properties of Cryptography/Encryption:
		1.Confusion
		2.Diffusion

	c)Definations-
		1.Algorithm
		2.Keys-Secret value used with an algorithm to encrypt and decrypt messages.
		3.Kerckhoff's priciple states: "only secrecy of the key provides security."

	d)Symmetric Encryption:
		1)Same key used for both encryption and decryption.
		2)Advantages:
			a)Easier to implement
			b)Faster
		3)Disadvantage:
			a)Key distribution

		4)Types:
			a)Block ciphers-Chunks of data/fixed length group of bits
				1.Requires padding if not enough data for a block.
				2.Block size
				3.More complex, not as fast
				4.May require an initialization vector.
				
			b)Stream ciphers-Bits encrypted one at a time.
				1.Faster/higher performance
				2.Susceptible to malacious insertions.

	e)Key Strength:
		a)Length and complexity of the key
		b)Longer is more secure.
		c)Key entropy or randomness-generated through pseudo-random numbers.			d)Initialization vector(IV):A fixed size random or psuedo-random value. Ensures that each message encrypted differently.
		e)Nonce-a random or pseudo-random number that used only ince and associated with a time stamp to increase key strength. A nonce can be used as an IV.

	f)Key Exchange:
		a)Process and method for sharing encryption keys.

		b)Especially when sender/ reciever are distant.

		c)In-band-key shared in the communications channel as the message.

		d)Out-of-band- using another transmission media agreed upon in advance.

		e)Forward secrecy/Perfect forward secrecy- if one key is compromisied, futher keys will not be compromised 

	g)Session and Ephemeral Keys:
		a)Session keys are randomly gerated to perform both encryption and decryption during the communication of a session between two parties.

		b)Valid only during that one communication session and are deleted.

		c)Ephemeral keys-also only used for one session. Common to ephemeral key agreement protocols.

	h)Asymmetric Encryption
		1.Uses two keys-one to encrypt the other to decrypt.
		2.Keys are mathematically related.
		3.Public/Private key encryption.
		4.Only private keys needs to be kept secret and only it can decrypt the message.

		5.Digital Signatures/Nonrepudiation:
			a)
			b)Message is signed using sender's priivate key.
			c)Anyone can verify signature by using the sender's public key.
			d)Used for repudiation(Proof of origin).
			e)Used for message integrity(proof messge hasn't been altered)
			f)Doesn't protect message confidentiality.

		6.Public Key Infrastructure:
			a)A set of roles. policies, and procedures needed to manage public-key encryption.

			b)The process of creating, managing, distributing, storing, using, and revoke keys and digital certificates.

Crypto Concepts-Part 2
	a)Hashing- Work by taking a string of any length and producing a fixed-length string for output.

	Hashing rules:
		1.Speed same no matter the data size.
		2.Impossible to regenrate the original message from it's hash value.
		3.Avoid hash collisions- each message has its own hash.
		5.Changing the original changes the hash value.

	b)Hashing Issues:
		a)Precoputing hash values of common words(rainbow tables).
		This attack is prevented with a salt. Salting using a prefix consisting of a random string of characters to passwords before they are hashed.

		b)Collision attacks tries to find two input strings of a hash function that have the same output.

	c)Elliptical Curve and Quantum cryptography

	d)Use of proven crypto algorithms
		1.NIST maintains publications and guidance for the use of approved cryptographic and hashing algorithms.

		2.Crypto best practices:
		 a)Use well-known and approved cryptographic algorithms.
		 b)Adhere to required minimum key guidance for the chosen algorithm.
		 c)Use approved cyptographic modes.
		 d)Use strong random number generators.

	e)Obsfucation and Steganogrphy:
		1.Obsfucation
			a)The act of making something difficult to understand.
			b)Should rely on something not known or widely discovered.
			c)Does not provide strong security.

		2.Steganography
			a)Means "hidden writting".
			b)Hiding messages, often in other media, so that unintended recipients are ot even aware of any message.

		3.Cryto Use Cases:
			State of Data
			a)Data at rest(stored).
			b)Data in transit(across a network)
			c)Data in use(being processed)


6.2.1 
Crypto Algorithms and PKI
	a)Obsfucation-The act of making something difficult to understand.Example Substitution cipher ROT13, XOR.

	b)DES-Data Encryption Standard
		1.Adopted by NIST in 1977
		2.Block cipher using 64-bit blocks- 56-bit key + 8 bits of parity.
		3.Short key length subject to brute force-force attacks.

	c)3DES-Triple DES
		1.DES algorithm computed three times.
		2.Using a "key bundle" that comprises three different DES keys, each of 56 bits=total bit strength of 168 bits(known as 3TDEA).
		3.Also option to reuse keys.

	d)AES- Advanced Encryption Standard
		1.Original name Rijndel.
		2.dopted by NIST in 2001.
		3.Block cipher with 128 bit block size.
		4.Three key lengths:128,192 and 256 bits.
		5.Uses multiple encryption rounds-
			10 rounds for 128-bit keys, 12 rounds for 192-bit keys, and 14 rounds for 256-bit keys.

	e)RC4/RC5/RC6-Rivest Cipher
		1.RC4 is a stream cipher, RC5 and RC6- block ciphers.
		2.Works with key sizes between 40 and 2048 bits.

	f)Blowfish/Twofish

	g)One-Time Pad(OTP):
		1.Most secure algorithm.
		2.Use of a key which is as long as the plain-text message.
		3.Only used once and then destroyed.

	h)Skipjack
		1.NSA developed block cipher used in clipper chip.
		2.Uses an 80-bit key to encrypt 64-bit blocks of data.

	i)Cipher modes(Block cipher):
		1)CTR-Counter Mode
			a)Turns a block cipher into stream cipher.
			b)Used to generate a keystream.
			c)Each block combine a nonce or IV with a sequentially assigned number to produce a unique counter block that is then encrypted.

		2)CBC-Cipher-Block Chaining
			a)Uses an IV with the first block.
			b)Thereafter, each block of plain text is obuscated with the cipher text from the previous block before it is encrypted.
			c)Introduces more diffusion and reduces effects of plain-text attacks.

		3)GCM-Galois/Counter Mode
			a)Provides both integrity and confidentiality.
			GCM uses CTR with 128-bit blocks.
			b)Each 128-bit block is given an encrypted number. That result is then obfuscated with the plain text, producing the cipher text.
			c)GMAC(Galois Message Authentication Code) is an authentication-only variant of the GCM which can be used as an incremental message authentication code.

6.2.2 

Asymmetric Algorithms:
	a)Extra computational overhead because of using 2 keys.
	b)Used for Secure exchange of a shared keys used for symmetric encryption and in digital signatures.
	c)Solves the issue of key exchange with symmetric encryption.

Asymmetric Algorithms:
	a)Riest, Shamir, and Adleman(RSA)
		1.Used for key exchange and digital signatures.
		2.Key can be any length.
		3.Algorithm works by multiplying two large prime numbers.
		4.Derives two different numbers: one public key and one private key.

	b)Diffie-Hellman key exchange
		1.Two parties, without prior arrangement can agree on a secret key that is known only to them.
		2.Only used to gernerate a shared key.
		3.Key can be safely/secretly shared on apublic network.

	c)Deffie-Hellman Ephemral
		1.Uses a different key for every conversation.
		2.Supports perfect forward secrecy.

	d)Elliptic curve cryptography(ECC)

	e)Elliptic Curve Deffie-HellmanEphemeral(ECDHE)

	f)El Gamal
		1.An extension to the Deffie-Hellman using an ephemeral key.

	g)Pretty Good Privacy(PGP) and GNU Privacy Guard(GPG)
		1.Used to encrypt and sign email messages

Hashing Algorithms:
	a)MD5(Message Digest 5)
	b)SHA(Secure Hash Algorithm)
	c)Message Authentication Code(MAC)
	d)Hash-based Message Authentication Code(HMAC)
	e)RACE Integrity Primitives Evaluation Message Digest(RIPEMD)

Attacks on hashes:
	a)Rainbow Table-John the ripper

Key Stetching: Process used to take weak key nd make it stronger, usully by making it longer.
	a)Bcrypt
		1.Based on the blowfish algorithm.
		2.Provides an adaptive hash function based on a key factor.

	b)PBKDF2(Password-Based Key Derivation Function 2)
		1.Algorithm applies a psuedo-random function to the pssword, combined with a salt of atleast 64 bits, and then repeats the process at least 1000 times.

6.3 Wireless Security
	6.3.1 Wireless Access Methods:
		a)Open Authentication- only need to know the network name/SSID.

		b)Shared Authentication
			1.The client and the wireess access point must negotiate and share a key prior to initiating communications.

			2.Pre-Shared key(PSK)- Each user uses the same key to connect to the wifi network.

		c)Enterprise
			1.A server handles distribution of cryptographic keys and/or digital certificates.
			2.Extensible Authentication Protocol(EAP)

	6.3.2 Wifi Protected Setup(WPS)
		A)Modes:
			1.PIN entry
			2.Push-button configuration(PBC)
			3.Near Feild Communication(NFC)

	6.3.3 Wireless Cryptographic protocols
		a)Wired Equivalent Privacy(WEP)
		b)Wifi Protected Access(WPA)
		c)WPA-2
			1.Uses AES for encryption.
			2.Based on IEEE 802.11i standard
			3.Uses CCMP(Counter Mode with Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol)
			 and Replaced TKIP.

	6.3.4 Authentication Protocols
		a)EAP 
			1.Requires an authentication server.
			2.Allows an=uthentication methods beyond username/password
			3.Provides support for public certificates.
			4.Four modes
				a)PEAP-Protected EAP
				b)EAP-TLS-EAP-Transport Layer Security
				c)EAP-TTLS-EAP Tunneled Transport Layer Security.
				d)EAP FAST-EAP Flexible Authentication via Source Tunneling.

6.4 PKI(Public Key Infrastructure)
	a)Solves the issues with key management.
	b)A set of roles, policies, and procedures needed to manage public-key(asymmetric) encryption.
	c)The process of creating, managing, distributing, storing, using, and revoke keys and digital crtificates.
	d)Public Key Infrastructure X.509 is the working group formed by the IETF to develop standards and models PKI.

	e)PKI Components
		1.Digital Certificate-A digitally signed block of data used to prove the ownership of a public key issued by a Certificate Authority.

		2.Includes
			a)Information about the key.
			b)Information about the identity of its owner.
			c)and also contains the digital signature of an entity that has verified the certificate's contents(called the issuer)

		3.X.509 v3 standard defines the certificate formats and feilds for public keys









